>> Rethinking how we think,
this week on "Firing Line."
>> Being original is not easy,
but I have no doubt about this.
It's the best way to improve
the world around us.
>> He's a best-selling author
and organizational psychologist
whose big ideas reach millions.
Adam Grant is an expert
on how we think and why.
>> How do the motives that
we bring to our interactions
with other people shape
the results we achieve?
>> A Wharton professor who's
advised Fortune 500 companies...
>> Sheryl Sandberg.
>> Adam Grant.
>> ...sports teams,
the Pentagon, and royalty.
>> Your body can't function
without your mind.
>> His mantra --
we all need to open up our minds
and allow ourselves to rethink
our core beliefs -- about
business, politics,
even life itself.
As the world changes faster
than ever before,
and our political culture
too often emphasizes digging in
over seeking common ground...
>> Jesus loves you!
>> My body, my choice!
>> ...what does Adam Grant
say now?
>> "Firing Line
with Margaret Hoover"
is made possible in part by...
And by...
Corporate funding is provided
by...
>> Adam Grant,
welcome to "Firing Line."
>> Delighted to be here.
>> You wrote the most-read
article on
The New York Times' website
in 2021, in the midst of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
And the title, "There's a Name
for That Blah You're Feeling.
It's Called Languishing."
You argued that Americans
were collectively feeling
a sense of languishing,
and that sensation of stagnation
and emptiness could be helped by
just naming it.
Now that we're in July of 2022,
the pandemic is ongoing,
inflation is high,
gas prices are high,
political polarization
continues.
Are Americans still languishing?
Or would you call it
something else?
>> Oh, that's an interesting
question.
I think -- I think a lot of
people are still languishing, in
part because of the
circumstances you're describing,
but also in part because
languishing is a feature
of the human condition.
We used to call it ennui --
that sense of aimlessness
and joylessness,
where you feel like the world
around you is stagnating
and you're not able
to make any progress.
And I think a lot of people
are feeling that right now.
I don't think it's quite as
severe now,
from the data that I've seen.
We're starting to see
a little bit of the tip,
from my perspective, of what's
called post-traumatic growth,
which is the idea
of not just bouncing back
but bouncing forward,
where people say,
"I wish that hadn't happened,
but because I'm stuck with it,
I'm going to walk away stronger,
I'm going to be more grateful,
I'm going to have deeper
relationships with people,
and I'm going to have
a new sense of possibility
and purpose.
>> You've talked about
the importance of flow
and that when you're in flow,
you are entirely consumed
in a single activity
and that can help one break free
of languishing.
You did this during the pandemic
by playing the video game
"Mario Kart" with your family
that was dispersed
across the country.
How are you finding
your flow now?
>> Well, "Mario Kart" is alive
and well.
We actually just played.
>> Do you do it as much as you
did during the pandemic?
>> Not quite,
but I think that some people
took that too literally, right?
So, I talked about --
>> You weren't advocating video
games as --
>> "Mario Kart" is the cure
for languishing, right?
The question is, what's
your version of "Mario Kart"?
And what I love about
"Mario Kart" is, it gives me
a sense of mastery.
There is nothing like the joy
that I get out of,
you know, placing a banana peel
so that my brother-in-law
will slip on it.
It forces me to be mindful.
And the weird thing was,
it also felt like I mattered,
because during the pandemic,
my kids were sort of
looking for something to do.
And I felt like I was able
to create something that
energized them and excited them.
>> You describe moments
that you refer to
as collective effervescence.
Perhaps you achieved that
with your family in playing
"Mario Kart."
But you also talk about
how most of us lost a sense
of collective effervescence
during the pandemic.
Now, as we look back, you know,
we don't know how COVID,
and long COVID in particular, is
going to affect the human body.
But what about how COVID
in particular will affect
the human psyche?
Will we bounce back, or will
this sort of linger in the way
long COVID does to the body?
>> Well, I think it's
a really important question,
and the data on this are
surprising to a lot of people.
So, not only will we bounce
back, many people have already
bounced back.
If you look at the mental-health
trends during the pandemic,
by the summer of 2020, there was
actually a substantial rebound.
And I think that maybe the
untold story of the last year
is people got more generous.
Rates of volunteering,
helping strangers, and
giving to charity all went up.
And that is the default in all
kinds of disaster and tragedy.
Right?
The news likes to amplify
the horror and the pain,
but the reality is that
what most people do is
they reach out in times of need.
And I think that's a hopeful
story about the human
condition -- right? --
that when people are depending
on you, you often find strength
you didn't know you had.
And that's something we need
to write about.
That's something we need to
mark, because otherwise we don't
notice that it's happening.
>> As an organizational
psychologist,
you've consulted for some of
the world's top companies --
Google -- some of the world's
top institutions -- NASA.
And I've heard you say
that hybrid work is
the global experiment of 2022.
>> Well, I think hybrid is the
future and maybe even the
present, too.
We saw many companies commit
to return-to-office plans
and then abandon them because
people didn't want to do it
but also because the evidence
is strong that as long as people
are in the office together
about half the week, on average,
if you let them work from
anywhere the rest of the week,
they are more productive, more
satisfied, more likely to stay,
no cost to their
promotion opportunities,
their collaboration,
or their relationships.
And I think a lot of leaders
have been dragged kicking
and screaming into this, saying,
"But how do I micromanage you
if I'm not sitting next to you?"
And forgetting that, in fact,
if they want to earn trust,
the best way to do that
is to show trust.
If you give people a little bit
of freedom and flexibility,
they reciprocate that with
loyalty and commitment.
There are challenges with
hybrid work.
It's harder, for example,
to do informal learning
and mentoring when we
we don't walk out of a meeting
and debrief it.
The meeting just ends, and we
disappear if we're in a Zoom
call.
It's a little bit harder
to feel a sense of culture
when you're not in the same room
with people.
But that doesn't mean we need
to be sitting next to each other
every day of the week.
>> Last year in
the United States,
47 million people
quit their jobs.
This is referred to as
the Great Resignation.
With the economy now approaching
a slowdown, established
companies and startups making
cuts in the workforce,
the so-called Great Resignation
may be over.
But have the fundamental issues
that caused so many employees
to quit been resolved?
>> I know of four factors
that seem to be driving
those decisions to walk away.
One is being underpaid
and finally throwing your hands
up and saying,
"I can't take it anymore."
Two is probably a taste
of freedom, that people
got a sense of flexibility
when they didn't have a boss
breathing down their neck
anymore, and they wanted
more of it.
Then a third factor
seems to be burnout,
that, you know, a lot of people
were just exhausted.
And then, four, what's causing
that burnout more than anything
else, it seems to be toxic
culture.
There was a great study
published earlier this year
looking at the drivers
of turnover.
Toxic culture was 10 times more
important than anything else
in predicting whether
people were going to leave
or stay in their jobs.
And I don't think those factors
are changing -- right? -- as we
move into an economic slowdown.
We still see people underpaid.
We still see people
wanting more flexibility.
We still see people burning out.
And toxic cultures
are sadly alive and well.
And I think people are going
to keep jumping ship
until we really rethink
what it means to be a workplace
and try to build
a real community where people
can do meaningful work
and feel trusted and respected
by the people around them.
>> You know, it reminds me of
the work-life balance research
you've conducted.
Has the pandemic changed
Americans' priorities,
in terms of how much of
themselves they're willing
to dedicate to a job?
>> I would love to see
better data on this.
It's such a good question.
I think, anecdotally,
from what I've seen,
more people have
walked home from work one day,
by which I mean, you know,
walk from their home office
to their kitchen,
which might be the same place,
and said, "I don't want my life
to be defined by work.
Why do I arrange my whole life
around work?
What if I could figure out
what my life priorities are
and then fit my job into that?"
And I think there's been a --
there's been a really
interesting anti-ambition
movement -- right? -- during the
pandemic.
>> Tell me more.
>> I've seen a growing number of
our students at Wharton,
I've also just heard from a
number of -- I guess
a growing number of my
"WorkLife" podcast listeners
saying, "Why do we have to
worship at the altar of hustle?
Why do we pray to a high priest
of grit?
Shouldn't we think about what
matters to us in life
and then try to figure out,
'Okay. Well, how can my work
support that?'"
And I've also seen
a lot of leaders and managers
sort of wake up and realize,
"You know what?
If people don't have quality of
life, I'm not going
to get quality work."
And if there is a silver lining
of COVID for our jobs,
it's that, for the first time
in my two decades as
an organizational psychologist,
we have many leaders
and managers realizing that
mental health is part of health.
I love an example of a manager
who said to a team,
"Look, it's okay to call in
sick.
It's also okay to call in sad."
And, Margaret, what I loved
about that was not the idea
that, "Now we're going to give
you five sad days a year, and if
you don't use them by December,
we're gonna take them away,"
right?
It was the idea of normalizing
the fact that it's okay to take
some time to try to recharge.
>> Gwyneth Paltrow, JJ Abrams,
former "Firing Line"
guest Melinda Gates
and Sheryl Sandberg
have all come to you for advice.
Even Prince Harry, you told him,
"I cannot overstate
the importance of a leader
and a manager saying, 'I care
more about your well-being
than I do about your results.'"
So you're saying
caring about employees
is good for the bottom line.
>> In the long run.
Yeah, I think a lot of leaders
see it as a cost, right?
Or as a distraction.
In the short term, maybe it is.
In the long run, people
generally will not care about
your mission unless you care
about them, full stop.
>> Is that generational?
Because these are not
characteristics that define
Gen X or the baby boomer
generation.
So how much of this
is generational and how much
of this is the new normal
based on the circumstances
created by a new economy
and COVID?
>> I'm pretty skeptical
of claims
that generations differ
in their fundamental values.
I think that human values
are part of our psyche,
and they don't seem to just
radically shift
from one generation to the next.
There was -- there's actually --
I think a lot of the claims
that we make about generational
differences are stereotypes.
Right? They're generalizations
about an entire group of people
that happen to be born in the
same roughly 20-year window
and assuming they have a bunch
of common characteristics.
>> So then what changes?
Cultural values change?
>> Well, I think what changes
is people's expectations
and the way that they express
their values.
And so I think that we should be
really careful when we assume
that this premium
on caring about people
is a millennial goal.
I think what's changed is
that millennials
are more self-expressive
than other generations, right?
>> That's for sure.
>> So they're a lot more likely
to tell you.
And they also have the
communication tools to
make it very, very apparent
when they are not
getting what they want.
And that's true of Gen Z,
as well.
And so I don't think it's
a generational shift so much
as I think it's a -- it's a set
of expectations that have
changed and a set of tools
and technologies
that have made it possible
to voice those expectations
and actually get heard.
>> Your best seller from 2021,
"Think Again: The Power
of Knowing What You Don't Know,"
helps make the case to readers
that the ability to rethink
one's own opinions
and assumptions is a critical
characteristic for success.
One of the places where this is
most difficult and least
acceptable is in our politics.
I want to give you an example.
Representative Adam Kinzinger,
a Republican from Illinois,
came to Congress in 2011,
completely opposed
any kind of gun reform or gun
reform legislation.
He still calls himself
a defender
of the Second Amendment,
but just last month, he signed
on to the first bipartisan
federal gun legislation in 30 --
almost 30 years.
He re-evaluated his thinking
after mass shootings in El Paso
and Dayton.
And you and I both know
that it is almost impossible
for elected officials
to change their mind without
being called flip-floppers
or without really being attacked
for being seen as weak.
>> Yeah.
>> How can we make it more
politically tenable
for political leaders
to re-examine their thinking
in the face of new evidence
and circumstances?
>> That is such
an important question.
It might be the defining
question of our time.
And I think the starting point
for me is to recognize
that changing your mind
doesn't necessarily
make you a hypocrite.
It might mean
that you've learned something.
And the question is,
why are you changing your mind?
It's not whether you've changed
your mind, right?
It's why.
If you're changing your mind
because you're trying to cater
to your constituents, then I
think it's reasonable to ask,
"Is this person flip-flopping?
Do they have real integrity?"
>> Flip-flopping is
an opportunistic change of mind.
>> Yeah, exactly.
Where you're basically
abandoning your principles,
and now I have questions
about your moral character.
But learning
is when you change your mind
because you encounter better
logic or stronger evidence.
And if you don't change
your mind in the face
of new facts,
then you are basically closing
the door to evolving.
And last time I checked,
learning is not about affirming
what you already believe.
It's about evolving
what you believe.
This is what I would ask --
This is exactly what I would ask
politicians to do is,
I would ask them,
"What are your current
principles, and what are the
conditions that would change
your mind?"
And if they pre-commit to
the evidence and the information
that would lead them to shift,
then all of a sudden,
when they evolve according
to that information,
when the world changes,
they change with it,
now I know they're learning and
they're not being hypocrites,
and I don't think we spend
enough time
asking politicians to explain,
"Okay, look,
I know you're a supporter
of the Second Amendment,
and I know right now
what that means is you're trying
to protect the right to bear
arms in a variety of ways.
What kinds of events in America
would have to happen to lead you
to wonder if we're taking
that freedom too far
and if there aren't ways
to give people that freedom
and still protect them
from mass shootings?"
Maybe we could even fulfill
both of those values
at the same time. Maybe.
>> I mean, as you know,
there are many people in our
politics who would pridefully
say, "There are no circumstances
or conditions under which my
mind would be changed,"
and they would be rewarded
by their voters
for taking that position.
>> Do you really think that?
>> In the base of the
Republican Party? Absolutely.
>> I'm not so sure.
>> Tell me why.
>> Well, I think that there's --
First of all, there's a risk
that some of these candidates
end up looking completely
stubborn and inflexible.
And nobody wants to be led
by a politician who refuses
to ever learn.
Now, the question is, are there
some single-issue voters
or maybe sacred issues
where people are okay with that?
Sure.
So maybe we don't start on guns.
>> Okay.
So then let's take this approach
to my skepticism,
because, as you know,
many Republicans
still believe that Donald Trump
won the election,
and they believe
in Donald Trump's election lie,
that Joe Biden is an
illegitimate president.
If you are face-to-face
with an election denier,
how would you make
a persuasive argument?
>> This is really hard.
I don't know if you can make
a persuasive argument.
>> Because there are some people
who simply won't engage with the
possibility that they're wrong.
>> Yeah.
So the first thing I would do
is, I would get out of preacher
and prosecutor mode.
"I'm right, you're wrong."
The harder I work to proselytize
my views and attack yours,
the more likely you are
to disengage altogether.
Or when I show up
in prosecutor mode,
you bring your defense attorney
to court and then neither of us
is willing to budge.
What I would do is I would sit
down with that person and say,
"It sounds like you are really
convinced that Donald Trump
won the election.
What evidence
would change your mind on that?"
And if you say, "Nothing,"
which I've had happen, I say,
"Okay. I just wanted to be
clear -- this is a religion for
you.
This is an article of faith
that you take as seriously
as your faith in God.
No matter who you spoke to
or what information you saw,
you're not going to budge."
And most of the time,
people backpedal
when I say that, and they say,
"Well, no, of course,
if I were to see the following,
I would reconsider."
And that's -- that's then,
you know, a little bit of a foot
in the door, right?
You're not necessarily gonna
change their mind in that
conversation, but changing
people's deep-seated beliefs,
especially when
they're consistent
with their hopes and dreams,
is not an overnight project.
Right? It's almost
a lifetime commitment.
And so what I want to do
is, I actually don't want
to make an argument
in that conversation.
I just want to get them to
reflect on if there's anything
that would change their mind.
And guess what -- now they're
in the driver's seat.
They feel a sense of ownership
over their own beliefs.
They're not under threat.
They don't have to put up
a shield.
>> Most folks that you talk
to will cite the things
that they've seen in the media
because they trust their trusted
media and media sources.
>> And that's the kicker here,
right?
When people believe things
that aren't true, when they're
drawn to conspiracy theories,
the problem is not one of
information, it's one of trust.
Right?
They are, generally speaking,
if you look at what draws people
to conspiracy theories,
they are looking to feel --
generally speaking,
people want to feel like
they have unique knowledge.
They want to feel that they're
in control in a world
that feels out of control.
And so it's much more comforting
to believe that there are
a few powerful people
that are orchestrating
the system for their own gain
than to believe, "You know what?
Like, sometimes the world is
unfair, and I'm the victim of
that."
>> You write about binary bias
and the human tendency
to seek clarity by simplifying
every issue into two categories.
So adding complexity and nuance
is actually a way out
of our hyper-polarization.
>> Yeah.
Binary bias is all around us,
and the more charged an issue
is, the more likely we are
to take a complex spectrum of
issues and beliefs and
oversimplify it by dumbing it
down into only two categories.
I love Robert Benchley's take
on this when he wrote
that "There are only two kinds
of people in the world -- those
who divide the world into two
kinds of people and those who
don't," right?
And too many of us are in that
first camp.
>> But take a hot-button issue
that's relevant in this moment.
Abortion.
>> Yeah.
All right. So Tim Kundro and I
ran a series of experiments
where we started
with the premise that
what you're encouraged to do --
everyone did this after
Donald Trump was elected --
you know, listen to the other
side, take their perspective.
And guess what.
On charged issues, when somebody
is on the other side
of a spectrum from you,
the more you try to take
your perspective,
the less likely you are
to see their perspective,
because you're just guessing,
and you do not want
to see the good in them.
So how do we get people
to realize that?
One of the ways we get to that
is, we said,
"Can you reflect on your life
having followed a different
trajectory?
Imagine you were born
in a family that had
the opposite views on abortion.
If you're a liberal, imagine you
were born in a religious family.
If you're conservative,
imagine you were born
on one of the coasts
to a bunch of atheists."
We asked people to do that
for just a couple minutes
and then engage with somebody
from the opposite side,
and their approach
is radically different.
They go from complaining
about baby killers
and women oppressors to saying,
"I don't agree with your stance
on the policy,
but I respect the fact
that you have a worthy principle
behind it,"
which is either, you know,
freedom or dignity of life.
And I think that this idea
of counterfactual thinking,
imagine that I was born
in a different world
or to a different family
or in a different time.
What it forces you to do
is realize that my beliefs
are not set in stone,
that it's possible I could have
a different stance on this issue
if I had experienced
a different set of life events.
And guess what -- now I realize
it's possible you could have
gone through that, too,
and that makes me more open
to rethinking my views
and also maybe puts you
in a position where you're more
open to rethinking yours.
>> This program, "Firing Line,"
is a revival
of the original "Firing Line,"
which was hosted for 33 years
by William F. Buckley Jr.
One of the hallmarks
of his program is that Buckley
welcomed all points of view
from across
the political spectrum
and engaged with friends
from the opposite perspective.
One of those friends
was Al Lowenstein,
who was a Democrat who was
admired by both liberals
and conservatives
and was a guest of Buckley's
on this program many times.
I want you to listen to this
excerpt from that program
in 1971.
>> First, I'll answer what I was
trying to answer before you
tried to get me to answer the
thing I'm not trying to answer.
Then I'll answer your second --
>> Which you will not answer.
>> Well, I'll answer both in due
course.
What my feelings are,
and I think you would agree
with this, is that people,
regardless of party labels,
ought to work together on issues
they agree about.
I don't think that my agreeing
with you about the draft
means that I'm committed
necessarily to supporting you
if you run for president.
If so, it'd be an awful decision
for me to make because
I'd like to work with you --
[ Laughter ]
I would like to continue working
with you against the draft
without feeling that obliged me
to support your ambitions.
>> You're being very sly, Al.
You're being very sly.
>> I can't keep up with you in
the department of being sly.
>> Two men, opposing political
views, able to engage with each
other respectfully, humorously,
with goodwill, and with
a presumption of goodwill.
How do we get back to that?
>> Time machine?
You need a DeLorean or a
Tesseract right now.
I would love to return to that
era.
What do we do?
So, people often say
great minds think alike.
Great minds don't think alike.
They challenge each other
to think again.
A lot of people think
that harmony is about
always being on the same page.
But if you actually think about
what musical harmony is,
it's the pleasing arrangement
of different tones.
And what that means is, when
somebody disagrees with you,
if you object to what
they think, you have a lot
to learn from how they think.
Now, of course, we would all
rather be surrounded by people
with similar values,
but similarity of values
is not beneficial
unless you also have disparity
of views.
I think consensus
makes us comfortable.
It's actually dissent
that makes us smarter.
And so when you encounter
somebody
who doesn't share your politics,
instead of immediately
retreating
into your echo chamber
or your filter bubble,
you could say,
"Wow. I actually learned more
from ideas that make me think
hard than opinions
that make me feel good.
I want to surround myself
with people who challenge
my thought process,
not the ones that agree
with my conclusions."
And I've actually started doing
this on social media.
I realized most of the people
I followed where people I
liked --
I basically was following people
because I liked the answers
they gave.
And instead, I said,
"What if I pay attention
to people because I admire
the intellectual integrity
they bring
to the questions they ask?"
In other words,
who are the people
I would listen to, regardless
of what conclusion they reached,
because I respect the discipline
and rigor of their thought
process?"
And paying attention to those
people, seeking those people out
for podcast conversations,
reading their articles,
has taught me
so much more than paying
attention to the people who hold
the same views that I do.
And I think what that requires
is to recognize that,
when people challenge
your core beliefs,
that is not a threat
to your ego.
It's an opportunity to grow.
>> I'm sure you've seen NASA's
James Webb Telescope images,
just mind-blowing images
of deep space.
And you've written about
the effect that astronauts,
by having the perspective
of how small humankind is
as they are orbiting the Earth,
that reaction, known as
the Overview Effect, you say,
makes astronauts realize
"a common identity
within all humankind."
Do you think these new glimpses
of the unknown
and deep space might have
a similar effect for all of us?
>> It's fascinating.
The studies on astronauts that
have captured this have shown
that they consistently come back
with more universalist values.
In other words, valuing
all humans or even all life
and the planet that protects
human life in a way
that they didn't before.
I don't know that just looking
at a telescope image
can accomplish the same thing.
And so I think what we should do
is, we should take everybody
who holds hateful views...
>> And send them to space.
>> ...we should slingshot them
out to space.
This is the best empirical
argument for space tourism
that I've ever seen.
And see if that is a lasting
shift in their worldview.
>> Adam Grant,
thank you for your work,
for your research,
for your contribution, and for
joining me here on
"Firing Line."
>> Thank you for having me.
It's an honor to be here.
>> "Firing Line
with Margaret Hoover"
is made possible in part by...
And by...
Corporate funding is provided
by...
>> You're watching PBS.